---
i18n: 'ipfs-arweave'
title: IPFS Filecoin and Arweave mini lesson
description: Overview on Storage Protocols.
icons: []
author: 'georgemac510'
---

# Storage with IPFS/Filecoin and Arweave

Among the many use cases for these great technologies, the most common are for
storage of image, audio and video NFTs as well as deploying web dApps.

## What is IPFS/Filecoin and how is it used in Web3 development?

![IPFS/Filecoin](/assets/lessons/ipfs-filecoin_and_arweave/ipfs-filecoin4.jpg)

**The textbook definition:** **IPFS** is a distributed system for storing and
accessing files, websites, applications, and data. **Filecoin** is a
peer-to-peer network that stores files, with built-in economic incentives to
ensure files are stored reliably over time.

**IPFS and Filecoin**

The **IPFS** decentralized web is made up of all the computers connected to it,
known as  *nodes*. Nodes can store data and make it accessible to anyone who
requests it.

If someone requests a file or a webpage, a copy of the file is cached on their
node. As more and more people request that data, more and more cached copies
will exist. Subsequent requests for that file can be fulfilled by any node or
combination of nodes that has the file on it. The burden of delivering the data
and fulfilling the request is gradually shared out amongst many nodes, so the
more popular the file, the deeper the _distribution_ of the file will be. For
IPFS, caching recall is shorter-term, unless using a gateway provider such as
[https://www.pinata.cloud/](https://www.pinata.cloud/), who provides over 200
caching locations allowing for speedy retrieval.

For longer-term storage, this is where **Filecoin** comes in. Filecoin is a
decentralized blockchain where miners are incentivized by payment in FIL, the
protocol’s native cryptocurrency, to store medium files such as videos, audios,
NFT images, NFT collections, scientific data. The Filecoin network allows for
**verification of storage** for users by accessing “proofs” on the Filecoin
blockchain.

**How is data stored on the traditional internet?** The data storage behind the
traditional internet(Web2) is predominantly servers—physical or virtual—in
massive server farms or cloud platforms such as AWS or Google Cloud. What
happens if the server farm is infected with a nasty virus and the entire
platform goes offline? These are centralized, potential points of failure which
we are “trusting” to stay online and continue to render service.

**Decentralized web networks such as IPFS/Filecoin and Arweave solve this
centralization** **problem by distributing the data to nodes and eliminate a
central point of failure.**

# What is Arweave and how is it used in Web3 development?

![Arweave Permaweb](/assets/lessons/ipfs-filecoin_and_arweave/arweave6.png)

### What is Arweave?

Arweave works on similar principals to IPFS and Filecoin, but functions more
like the combination of the two in its **blockweave** protocol.
Its [P2P protocol](https://www.webroot.com/in/en/resources/glossary/what-is-peer-to-peer-networking)
allows various users
([nodes](https://learn.bybit.com/blockchain/what-are-nodes/)) with large storage
spaces on their hard drives to connect with the Arweave network, and to store
data for others. The network then rewards these nodes for offering their storage
services. As the volume of data stored in a particular system increases, the
amount of
 [hashing](https://learn.bybit.com/blockchain/what-is-hashing-in-blockchain/)
needed for the consensus decreases, resulting in more cost-effective data
storage.

### How does Arweave work?

The workings of the Arweave protocol can be best understood by looking at the
two layers involved: blockweave
and [permaweb](https://arweave.medium.com/welcome-to-the-permaweb-ce0e6c73ddfb).

**_Blockweave_** is different from the typical blockchain that many cryptos are
built upon. Apart from storing transactional information, blockweave also stores
the data information on each block. Like other blockchains, each block on
blockweave refers to its previous block. On blockweave, however, this previous
block is attached to a randomly selected block known as the **recall block.**
The Arweave protocol uses a consensus mechanism called 
[SPoRA](https://tokenpost.com/Arweave-Introduces-New-Consensus-SPoRA-6729), a
**_proof of access_**.

This consensus rewards the participating _nodes_ in the network for storing all
of Arweave’s transactional history. Let’s say you want to manage a node on the
Arweave blockchain. To receive block rewards, you must prove to blockweave that
you have complete **_access_** to the data in the previous block, along with
some randomly selected **_recall block_**. If you don’t have **_access_** to the
**_recall block_**, blockweave will know that you aren’t storing all the
transactional data on the Arweave blockchain, and will thus deny you any block
reward.

The other main component in the Arweave network is **_permaweb_**, a
decentralized web built on top of the Arweave blockchain. This is where all of
the deployed Arweave DApps are stored.
