---
i18n: "wallets"
title: Introduction to web3 wallets
description: Overview of wallet use cases and setting up environment.
icons: []
author: ["piablo", "Meowy"]
---

import { NextSeo } from "next-seo";
import { LessonHeader } from "../../../components/mdx/LessonHeader";

<NextSeo
  title="Introduction to web3 wallets"
  description="Overview of wallet use cases and setting up environment."
/>
<LessonHeader title="Web3 wallets, and public and private keys..." />

### What do we have in store?

If you are reading this, you may be new to blockchain development and want to
know a bit about crypto wallets and how you can use them effectively along your
way. We’ll look at wallet variants, typical use cases, a wee bit at public and
private keys, and we’ll discover why without a wallet we just can’t get near a
blockchain! We’ll also give you a run down of best practices on setting up your
wallet for development, so you can get to work!

### **First a bit on wallet variants, use cases and users**

A blockchain enthusiast can choose from a few different types of wallets.

Custody.... who holds those elusive keys?

- **Custodial**: _You don't_ have the keys, but a _custodian_ does e.g. a CEX -
  centralised exchange
- **Non custodial**: _You do_ have the keys. You’re a web3 boss!
- **Shared custody**: Multiple people have different individual keys i.e. a
  multi-sig

Wallets vary on their connectivity...

- **Hot**: Always connected to the internet e.g. a browser extension, a mobile
  app, a CEX wallet
- **Warm**: Connected, but requires human interaction to sign.... a more recent
  development
- **Cold**: Never connected to the internet e.g. a USB hardware wallet, a paper
  wallet

The crypto original is the paper wallet. Make sure you have **at least** one
paper, or alternative offline variant for all your private and public keys,
**_mnemonic_** details and passwords, and keep them somewhere
**_really.....really.....really_** safe.

![wallet_choices.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/wallet_choices.png)

<center>A few hot wallets</center>

A typical user would have a wallet for making transactions such as buying,
selling, swapping, or _staking_ of all sorts of crypto tokens. Also for
_signing_ other messages, e.g. casting a vote, claiming attendance at an event,
proving identity, or getting access to an organisation’s Discord server.
Multi-sig wallets, or safes are often used by organisations for added security.
**_Multi_**ple **_sig_**natures are required to sign off on decisions or to
authorise transactions. The list of types and use cases is growing fast. You may
even use your own shiny, new wallet to sign and prove that you have completed a
lesson you are doing right now!

### So you what actually goes on in this wallet?

First things first. A wallet doesn’t hold any tokens. It’s a miracle of
software, which acts like a window, letting you look from a centralised Web2
internet into a decentralised Web3 network where for example those tokens
**_do_** live on a blockchain ledger. Remember these two webs are not naturally
connected. The wallet is actually how an everyday user or developer can connect
with a blockchain, and also signal their digital identity and ownership of their
assets.

![window.ethereum.code.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/window.ethereum.code.png)

What the wallet **_does_** hold, are called a public and private key pair, and
let’s not forget the mnemonic seed recovery phrase that generates this key pair,
all of which you should have noted safely on your cold paper wallet. Right?

### Public and private keys. A simple analogy

Let’s remember that we are talking about a world of digital infrastructure where
everything we send, receive and store as messages is represented……yes,
digitally. Messages can be digital files of music, text, PDFs, video, you name
it, and let’s not forget, digital money i.e. **_crypto_**graphic **_tokens_**.
So we can think of a public key as an email address to which anyone can send an
email message. And we can similarly consider a private key, as the password of
that email account. We need the password to see, send and sign any messages and
prove they are destined **for** us, or come **from** us.

![qafkeys.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/qafkeys.png)

So, the public key is our digital identity on a decentralised network e.g. a
blockchain. Therefore if the last project you worked on has forgotten to pay
you, make sure they have your public key, so they can send you a digital message
..... containing some digital money! And that private key of yours is what you
use to sign any action, whether it is seeing or transacting with your assets, or
simply proving who you are. Sharing your public keys is pretty much what you
_do_ want to do, but sharing your private keys is certainly not.

### Generation of your wallet keys and blockchain address - the basics

On downloading a wallet, the application generates a private key and an
accompanying mnemonic phrase (12 or 24 random words from a finite list), which
in turn generates a public key, and that gets _encoded_ with the Keccak-256
_hashing function_ to create an cryptographic blockchain address just for you.
Lots of maths and cryptography!

![EthAddressGenerated.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/EthAddressGenerated.png)

Public Key Cryptography, even at a simplistic level, warrants some time, and we
look forward to giving it proper attention in a dedicated blockchain
fundamentals section. It is a cornerstone to the integrity of decentralised
networks, letting us interact with each other on them safely. Together, they are
a powerful pair for proving your identity and what you own. **Guard your
seed/recovery phrases and private keys with your life!**

### Enough chit-chat. Let’s get you set up…… **with safety in mind!**

**Step 1**. We recommend that you **do not** use your personal wallet for web
development. And you can actually make your life a lot less complicated by
creating a new browser profile for each new wallet. You can see below, I have
different use cases for wallets, and have a separate browser profile for each
with its own wallet:

![profiles_on_browser.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/profiles_on_browser.png)

You will have a separate mnemonic seed phrase, plus public and private keys for
each one, _and_ you will need to create a password, all of which you need to
store safely somewhere. You can generate any number of key pairs from the seed
phrase, which means that you can create as many accounts as you want inside a
particular wallet. As a developer, that’s handy when you need to send test
transactions to mock actors when you are testing your apps. I also have a few
accounts in my dev_workshops wallet.

**Step 2**. Download a wallet. We are going to be using Metamask. It’s a well
audited wallet with lots of features to get our job done.<a
style={{textDecoration: 'underline'}} href="https://metamask.io/"
target="\_blank">Download MetaMask</a> and follow the steps carefully:

![MM_for_Brave.png](/assets/lessons/wallets/MM_for_Brave.png)

When you have completed your download, **make sure that you have your new
address, your keys, recovery phrase and password written down on paper and/or
stored safely offline. If you have them saved on your machine and your operating
system dies for whatever reason, you have no way of recovering these private
details. There’s no customer service. Gone is gone.**

### Ready to Roll!

We will have a separate article on using Git and Github, as you will likely be
using shared public repositories quite often. We will show you how to safely
store private keys in private **.env** files. Stay tuned for that.

Now you should be ready to get up and running with your projects. If you need
test ETH, see the end of our article on _Testnets_, where you can find steps to
the _faucet_ for Goerli Testnet. And check out _Connect with RPC_ for when you
need to start deploying your work to the distributed networks that make up Web3.

Don't lose those keys and happy coding!!!
