---
title: Testnets mini-lesson
description: Mini-lesson for Testnets
icons: []
author: 'piablo'
---

# Test, test, test, testnets

**TL'DR**

This meant primarily to give an overview on what testnets are and how they fit
in to the grander scheme of things. Enjoy!

**The real world implications of ‘why’ a testnet**

There are many human coordination problems that Web3 hopes to solve. For
example, four billion of our cousins in the world don’t have _financial
services_ of any kind at all, and data harvesting has proven to have so many
adverse effects. What does that have to do with a testnet, you might ask.

Bitcoin, was made possible by decades of research and testing, proving that a
decentralised, censorship-resistant money system can work. Fast forward a few
years, and smart contract and their auxiliary networks are adding so much more
innovation to benefit human coordination, but with each new complexity, the need
for extra diligence increases. There are a few too many cases of hurried
development, that have had quite drastic outcomes. Our response? The mantra of
“test, test, test”. Later in D_D Academy, we will deep dive in _coding with
Test Driven Development_, but let’s first address actual test networks.

**So what makes one different to a _live network_ for me as a smart contract
developer?**

As it suggests, a testnet is a _safe space_ blockchain network where developers
can run, re-run and compare results for their applications, making sure they are
bug free and stable for use in production on live networks. So we can think of a
testnet as a sandbox environment, where we can feel comfortable to play around
and get things right. And new developers can quickly start to build confidence
alongside their seasoned colleagues, who dedicate a great portion of their time
on them with an extremely strong focus on secure code.

![Sanbox](/assets/lessons/testnets/sandbox.png)

<center>Developing and collaborating on the future</center>

**Faucets and how do I get started?**

Most of the actions on a live blockchain incurs a transaction fee, but tokens on
a testnet used for transactions have no financial value. We can request small
amounts of them to be transferred from a website hosted faucet through the use
of our wallet. e.g. <a style={{textDecoration: 'underline'}}
href="https://goerli.net" target="\_blank">Goerli Faucet</a>. Despite having no
financial value, some faucets do occasionally get drained. You might be asked to
broadcast your request with your wallet address on a social media platform, to
be in some way accountable. So, there’s a small chance that you need to shop
around to find one with a balance.

![Faucet](/assets/lessons/testnets/faucet.png)

**Other vital uses of testnets**

Not only do we use them for testing our applications, but they are vital for
testing the architectural facets of whole blockchains, such as the viability of
scaling and security, new client software for validator nodes, etc. If it wasn’t
for testnets, we would never have known if _The Merge_ of Ethereum was possible.

**The bottom line**

If we want to ensure global adoption of web3, every single one of us has the
responsibility of making it secure. A testnet is the gateway to our collective
success. Let’s BUIDL safely for our seven billion friends.
